# Mental Health Analysis

In this data analysis project, I will try and analyze data.
shocker isn't it

## Questions

1. Is there a tipping point where a higher salary doesn't correlate with higher job satisfaction and lower physiological distress, and what factors contribute to that plateau's existence?

    Hypothesis: I believe so, because people with a higher salary tend to have more responsibilities, and that eventually cancels out the satisfaction gained from having a higher salary, which in turn also worsens their mental health conditions.

2. Does a bigger company size or bigger team size correlate to higher burnout and higher stress levels, and why?

    Hypothesis: Yes, this is due to the fact that a bigger team size and a bigger company size would mean more work was needed to be done, and more mental effort is required to be able to get all those people to work together as a single unit.

3. Does work location (remote, hybrid, on-site) correlate with their job satisfaction, and might there be any factors to explain why some work locations might be less fulfilling than others?

    Hypothesis: People working remotely will have better job satisfaction scores, as it allows for a more flexible lifestyle than other work locations.

4. Are there any geographical regions or countries have a higher correlation between the gap of employees having high clinical mental health scores like PHQ9 and/or GAD7, and actual mental health support/therapy usage, and what factors might explain this disparity?

    Hypothesis: It will have a pattern, as the country's culture, and stigma related to mental health and therapy, will significantly impact the amount of people getting help.

## Finding the Dataset

At first, I looked at the I-NAMHS survey and the WHO health indicators dataset provided by data.humdata.org. But after a quick look at it, I saw that the dataset it provided had a lack of structural complexity and variable density, which did not support the deeper analysis I intended to conduct.

So, I ended up going back to the classic [kaggle.com](https://www.kaggle.com) website to inquire a dataset about mental health myself.

After a quick search, I found a dataset that I thought was a good fit. Although it was synthetic, it contains 100,000 rows of data, generated by calibrating on peer-reviewed research, such as the Burnout Index, WHO Activity Guidelines, and the validated **PHQ-9** and **GAD-7** clinical instruments  
used in real medical practice globally.

[LINK TO MENTAL HEALTH DATASET](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohankrishnathalla/mental-health-and-burnout-in-tech-workers-2026)

## Data Cleaning Process

Now in general, datasets, or data in general, need to be cleaned, so that they are ready for analysis. This one is no different.

So I decided to use python's pandas library to clean this data up. This is to ensure reproducibility of the clean results, and being able to document and rollback changes very easily using a version control system like Git.

To start the process, I started by initializing my Git and GitHub repository, setting up the uv package manager, mypy, ruff and of course, pandas.

Sooner on, I realized that jupyter notebooks would be better for prototyping and that it would be better if I did that for a bit then combined it into a full python script later.

I started by identifying all the useless columns and then filtering those out immediately, as they were just extra useless verbose data to work with and it's better to get those out of the way before I started the data cleaning process.

Then, I got started with the actual data cleaning, this was to optimize memory usage and data integrity, to ensure a better analysis.

I first started by removing and dropping columns that were not going to answer our questions in this deep-dive analysis. This step alone already resulted in a 40% decrease in memory consumption.

Next, I went ahead and used the `pd.to_numeric` function on some of those columns to save some memory, turning `float64` to `float32` datatypes, `int64` to `int32` and `int16` types, and turning the binary columns (column that only have 1 and 0) to a `bool` type. This step resulted in a further decrease in memory consumption of 20%.

Now, no amount of memory optimization is going to save it from inconsistent data values, so I checked the columns to see if there were any outliers in it's unique values. To my surprise, there weren't any duplicate values nor any inconsistent values. So, safe to say it is now ready for analysis.

## Data Analysis

For analysis, I used SQL to find data insights, because the queries are reproducable and ...
